If you've ever thought roads are more
complicated now than they were before,
well, you're right. They are in most
places. Let me show you. This is an
intersection in my city back in 2012. 15
years ago, this street had three lanes
in each direction and a pair of bike
lanes. This intersection is near a park
and had these little paths, too. Look at
it today. Ladder crosswalks, painted
bike lanes, protected intersection, a
second crossing for just that park path,
a cycle track on the cross street. Just
a whole lot more paint everywhere. I
know this is an extreme example, but in
many US cities, you don't need to look
far to see at least a few of these.
Buffered bike lanes, green paint,
flashing crossings, a different kind of
flashing crossings, roundabouts, another
kind of round intersection that's not
actually a roundabout, curb extensions,
painted curb extensions, bike boxes,
left turn boxes, signs, signs, signs,
and more signs.
And on and on. Most of this stuff was
nonexistent in the US 15 years ago. It's
all meant to make the roads safer,
particularly for people walking or on
bikes. But I'm on my city's active
transportation committee, and I've heard
some complaints from drivers that they
feel like all of these changes are
making the roads less safe. Drivers
don't always know what this new stuff is
or what they should do when they
encounter it. And when people aren't on
the same page on the road, crash risk
can increase. Now, I've made it no
secret on this channel that I'm a big
fan of pedestrian and bicycle
infrastructure. But there is no denying
that when I drive around, I definitely
have to think more than I used to.
Why do we have all this new stuff now?
Does this put all road users in danger?
Let's talk about it after the bike bell.
>> [bell]
>> If you're a driver, I can imagine that
the change in streets over the last few
years feels like when your favorite app
starts to add feature after feature
until it suffers from bloat. You wonder
who uses all of this stuff. The reason
you got on the app in the first place is
now hidden behind other features, and
and now the whole thing feels unusable
to you.
That analogy works for roadways, but
only to an extent. If the app was called
streets, it was designed primarily for
one type of user, drivers. But it's not
so much that the transportation
engineers kept adding new features,
things like bike lanes, wider sidewalks,
crosswalks, and so on. It's more that
those engineers kept them from being
added in the first place. People have
wanted all of these new features, but
the engineers, planners, and
decision-makers decided to focus only on
one user type. Why would they do this?
Well, let's hop in our DeLorean and take
a journey back in time.
Prior to the automobile, streets looked
like this. There were no markings
anyway. Pedestrians ruled, interrupted
by horse-drawn carts and carriages. Many
of the roads at the time weren't even
paved, or if they were, they didn't have
any pavement markings at all. When
people started adopting the automobile,
there was a demand for some sort of
regulation to keep people on the
sidewalks so drivers could move more
freely and faster. This is also an era
of danger where cars were hitting people
and other cars. This is why we see the
advent of things like lane markings and
the beginnings of traffic control
devices like signals at intersections.
If you want more information about this
particular moment of history, check out
this video I did. It's one of my
favorites. Cars swept the nation, and it
seemed like they represented America,
powerful, independent, kind of
dangerous. There wasn't a ton of demand
for better pedestrian or cyclist
facilities out there. But by the 1960s,
people began rethinking a lot of stuff,
like bikes, drugs, and rock and roll.
Davis, California, in July 1967,
installed the first bike lane in the US.
They were even curb protected. This
happened because planners in Davis had
begun a time-honored tradition of
visiting the Netherlands, falling in
love with their bike culture, and
bringing it back to their city. Davis
city officials wanted to be the bike
capital of the US, and they accomplished
their task.
So now we have our first big addition to
the street, complicating things just a
little bit.
Now there's one space for cars and
another space for bikes.
This bothered a guy named John Forester.
He was an engineer, though not a traffic
engineer, who believed that creating
separate spaces for cyclists was a plan
to get cyclists off the road
permanently, severely limiting where
cyclists could go, only on approved
routes. He advocated for vehicular
cycling, where cyclists are treated like
cars. That means that they take the full
lane all the time and don't need or use
bicycle-specific infrastructure.
He wrote books and advocated fiercely
for his position. His arguments were
popular with local and state
transportation officials because it
essentially meant that they had to do
nothing to support cyclists. Just let
them use the road like a car. The result
of this was that only extremely
confident cyclists felt comfortable on
the roads. These guys were nicknamed
mammals for middle-aged men in Lycra.
Now, there's nothing wrong with mammals,
but it became clear that vehicular
cycling was holding back a lot of
potential cyclists. The Dutch ideas of
separated bicycle facilities created a
society where everybody felt comfortable
on a bike. Eventually, cities turned
away from vehicular cycling and started
adding new facilities like bike lanes.
Okay, but here's the thing. All of this
new paint, signage, curbs, it all has to
be the result of safe, sound traffic
engineering. If someone were to get into
a crash because the city went rogue and
designed some strange new like wiggle
lanes or something, they could sue the
city government and they'd probably win.
Cities are inherently risk-averse. They
don't want to introduce new
infrastructure that's going to confuse
drivers and cause crashes.
City engineers rely on manuals produced
by the Federal Highway Administration
and the American Association of State
Highway Transportation Officials.
If the engineers design their streets
according to the standards found in
these books, they're unlikely to be sued
if there's a crash. So, I know it feels
like streets might be less safe now as a
driver with all of this new stuff, but
it's all okay according to the federal
government. It actually took decades for
these organizations to approve many of
the new pedestrian and bicycle
facilities we use today. We can again
thank John Forester and the vehicular
cyclists for that. The 1981 AASHTO guide
basically photocopied John Forester's
Cycling Traffic Engineering Handbook.
The guide discouraged separate bicycle
facilities and it didn't really change
until the fourth edition of the book
released in 2012.
That's really when it felt like the dam
burst for changes on US roadways. Local
engineers now had the guidance they
needed to build a wide variety of new
infrastructure, including buffered bike
lanes, green paint for bike lanes,
neighborhood greenways, and shared use
paths. I should also add that another
organization, the North American City
Transportation Officials, another street
design organization, released their
highly influential urban bikeway design
guide in 2011. The guide provided detail
about other more advanced bicycle
infrastructure that was already being
deployed in cities like New York and
Portland, Oregon, ahead of the AASHTO
guide. Okay, so I hope I've shown you
why it seems like street design
completely jumped up a notch starting in
2011-2012.
But can this new infrastructure really
be safe? When I drive, it makes me feel
so like uncomfortable. It turns out
that's actually the point. There are two
major problems with cars these days.
First is speed, and the second is
distracted driving. Drivers who go slow
and pay attention are way safer than the
alternative. Complicated roads can help
drivers go slow and pay attention. One
of the way transportation engineers have
made streets more difficult for drivers
is narrowing lanes. In the past, city
traffic engineers looked to road design
manuals meant for highways. Highways
have very wide lanes, often around 12
ft. When city streets are that wide,
people drive like they're on a highway.
The 2012 AASHTO guide gave engineers
permission to narrow lanes to 10 or 11
ft. Sometimes, if there were bike lanes
already, those extra couple feet became
painted buffers. This gives the driver
the impression of narrowed lanes and
funnels them further from the bike
lanes. It adds this visual complexity,
and it improves safety by reducing
speeds and conflicts with cyclists.
Distracted driving is the other major
problem with cars these days, and the
complexity on our roadways can help
people pay attention. It can be too
[clears throat] easy for a road to lull
you into a sense that you can safely
check your texts, change the radio
station, or grab something out of your
bag while driving. Adding elements to
the roadway can alert you to potential
conflicts you might not have noticed
otherwise, keeping your eyes on the
road. One example is crosswalk design.
It used to be that the standard was what
engineers is transverse stripes,
basically two lines crossing the road.
Today, it's common to see cities use
perpendicular lines. These can be
continental, ladder, or zebra
crosswalks.
Let me know in the comments what type of
crosswalks your city uses. And while
you're doing that, consider subscribing
to the channel. I literally never ask
this, but I've told it can help. If you
believe in the mission of the channel to
educate as many people as possible about
cities and city planning, it's one of
the easiest ways to help. Okay, I'm
done.
Buffered bike lanes and high-visibility
crosswalks account for a lot of the new
paint on the road these days. But it's
not only paint that's popping up all
over. You're seeing cities using curbs
in new ways, too. Maybe the most
prominent example is at intersections.
They can be used to reduce the turning
radius for cars. This can make it feel
more complicated for a driver to do
something simple like turn a corner. But
again, that's the point. You have to
slow down and pay attention to your
turn. It makes it safer. You can see
evidence here that some drivers have a
hard time with that, but overall, this
is another effective strategy.
Finally, there are new lights out there.
It used to be that all you needed to
know is that green means go, red means
stop, and yellow means caution. Oh, and
there are arrows, too. Not that hard.
But cities have been adding other
lights, like ones that explicitly tell
drivers they cannot turn on red. Or
these two types of crossing lights.
The first one with the yellow lights is
a rapid rectangular flashing beacon.
These are used at mid-block crossings
where a painted crosswalk doesn't offer
enough visibility to ensure drivers will
come to a stop and let people cross. A
user presses a button, triggering the
light.
There is yet another type of crossing
light called a high-intensity activated
crosswalk or HAWK signal. It's activated
with a push button, but instead of
yellow lights, it triggers a full-on
stoplight. Cars must stop. After a set
period of time, the solid red turns to a
flashing red, turning it into a stop
sign. Drivers must stop, but can proceed
through the crosswalk if the way is
clear.
These lights are all about making sure
drivers are paying attention to other
road users and allowing people to cross.
The HAWK signal seems to confuse
drivers, even though there's a sign
right there about how to use them. I
think that's where education comes in.
Roads have changed a lot since 2012, but
most drivers on the road today passed
their driver's test before all of this
became the norm. DMVs need to make sure
to update their tests and include what
to do when encountering these new
facilities. I remember when I took my
driver's test in like 1999, there were
three questions about what to do when
you encounter a horse, but nothing at
all about bikes. I believe that a lot of
the concerns and complaints about the
new additions to our streets will
dissipate as more people get get used to
them and as more people grow up not
knowing anything different. It will take
time, but soon it will seem crazy that
our roads ever looked like this at all.
Hey, it's springtime, which means you,
like me, might be starting to plan out
some trips or vacations this summer. And
before you go anywhere, you need a good
bag to pack all of your stuff. My go-to
bag for years now has been the Bellroy
Transit Backpack. That's why I'm so
excited they reached out to sponsor the
channel. I've been a fan of their
products for years. And I say products
plural because after I used this bag for
a year or so, I went out and bought
another Bellroy bag for my everyday
carry.
Again, this is well before they
sponsored the channel. That's how big of
a fan I am of these bags. I bought one
and then I bought a second. I really had
to stop myself from buying a third. But
the thing is, I don't really need one
because these are just so well-made. My
everyday carry has spent over 3,000
miles in the basket of my bike through
rain and wind and sun and it looks
great. The Transit Backpack has been
with me on trips to three continents and
still looks amazing. These bags are so
well-made that since I purchased them,
Bellroy has released newer versions of
them. So, if you like to check out these
bags on their website, make sure you
look for the Transit Work Pack 26 L
and the Classic Backpack 3rd Edition.
They actually didn't start with
backpacks, but first started making slim
wallets, which is what I would recommend
to you if you want to try them out, but
don't want to dive into a backpack right
away. Bellroy are also just really great
at figuring out how to organize the
stuff you carry. They make key
organizers, cable and tech organizers,
pouches, and more.
As Bellroy are a certified B Corp, you
can be sure they're environmentally and
socially responsible, too. They invest
in the use of recycled materials in a
lot of the products they make, and they
use eco and dry tanned leather, which is
drastically better for the environment
than the status quo. This bag, my
everyday carry, is made from recycled
water bottles. I'd rather have that
plastic protecting my laptop than
polluting the ocean. You can go get 10%
off of all Bellroy products by clicking
on the link in the description or on
screen. So, go get yourself a
sustainable, quality backpack or
organizer you'll love for years to come.
I'm so glad they're a channel sponsor,
and I can't recommend them enough.